Add proposal for Node OS image caching (#3624)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure: docs/proposals/20230612-node-os-image-caching.md

        - [NFR1](#nfr1)
        - [NFR2](#nfr2)
    - [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
    - [Security Model](#security-model)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
    - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
    - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

Node Prototype Pattern - Where we take a known good/working OS snapshot and make a “prototype” upon which all future node OS’ images are based.

Warm nodes - The concept of keeping up extraneous and unused nodes to prevent having to wait for patches or security updates, thus allowing you to have those nodes ready when more users try to use your service without the wait times.

Shared Image Gallery - A repository that is an Azure Resource for managing and sharing images

Snapshot - A static copy of the image at the point in time that it is taken

## Summary

> A controller will be added to CAPZ which caches the Nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and updates the model to use that image for future scale outs. This feature request will allow for faster horizontal scaling and will help prevent security alerts from new nodes which immediately need a security update as those new nodes will now come with the security update already installed. This feature will also help prevent users from needing to spin up warm nodes due to this faster horizontal scaling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A controller will be added to CAPZ which caches the Nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and updates the model to use that image for future scale outs. This feature will allow for faster horizontal scaling and will help prevent security alerts from new nodes which immediately need a security update as those new nodes will now come with the security update already installed. This feature will also help prevent users from needing to spin up warm nodes due to this faster horizontal scaling.
```

> A controller will be added to CAPZ which caches the Nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and updates the model to use that image for future scale outs. This feature request will allow for faster horizontal scaling and will help prevent security alerts from new nodes which immediately need a security update as those new nodes will now come with the security update already installed. This feature will also help prevent users from needing to spin up warm nodes due to this faster horizontal scaling.

Reviewer: It could be beneficial to break the sentences about what the feature will allow for into bullet points.

Author: It was, fixed, thanks!

The UX will mostly be impactful towards operators and members of the CAPZ community will test these changes and give feedback on them. Security will also likely follow in terms of how it gets reviewed, but no major security problems should be possible from this change. For folks who work outside the SIG or subproject, they should hopefully have faster horizontal scaling without needing to directly do anything outside of maybe a feature flag just as a collateral effect.

## Alternatives

No currently known alternatives exist which are public and have been implemented for CAPZ. A savvy operator may also have created a similar system for their nodes but we hope to offload that responsibility to the CAPZ team in this process, and currently no other open source implementations of this for CAPZ are known to exist. 
	In terms of when to take a snapshot, a day is given as a general example which should be good for typical use but the specification of how often will be customizable as we know that certain operators have different strategies and use cases for how they’re running their services on our clusters. 

> In terms of how we choose a node as the blessed one, lots of different metrics or heuristics can be used like manually creating a temporary prototype for testing, having the fastest ready time, or anything else which is seen as typically good but a more generalist approach is outlined here since more specific methods may not be as helpful for certain operators. 

Reviewer: It could be helpful to define what a "blessed" node is in the glossary

There will be e2e tests, at least one of which will be as follows:
 Have an example node and an example patch, apply the patch to the preexisting node, and then trigger the controller to pretend the interval of time has passed, and then it should attempt to create another node and compare the OS image of the new node and the original node, finding that they are both the same image.
It should be tested primarily in isolation as other components shouldn’t affect what it tries to do, but it may need to be checked with other components to see what happens if certain race conditions or updates at the same time of AzureMachineTemplate are occurring (in which case a lower priority should likely be assigned to this controller for finishing its task after as ideally those changes are in effect before isolating the node).

### Graduation Criteria [optional]

alpha - The feature is initially constructed and toggleable with a flag
beta - The feature has e2e tests implemented and is more integrated and seamless with the project
stable - The feature has been used for a while and is widely acceptable as well as reliable and will now be enabled by default.

### Version Skew Strategy [optional]

> The feature itself should not depend significantly on the version of CAPI and will be backwards compatible with old versions of CAPZ since it will be a toggleable feature, so if there is a drift in CAPI and CAPZ versions the functionality should stay the same without breaking anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The feature itself should not depend significantly on the version of CAPI and will be backwards compatible with old versions of CAPZ since it will be a toggleable feature. If there is a drift in CAPI and CAPZ versions, the functionality should stay the same without breaking anything.
```

nit

---
title: Proposal Template
authors:
  - "@bennycortese"
reviewers:
  - "@nojnhuh"
  - "@CecileRobertMichon"
  - "@jackfrancis"
  - "@willie-yao"
creation-date: 2023-06-12
last-updated: 2023-06-12

status: provisional|experimental|implementable|implemented|deferred|rejected|withdrawn|replaced
see-also:
  - "/docs/proposals/20190101-we-heard-you-like-proposals.md"
  - "/docs/proposals/20190102-everyone-gets-a-proposal.md"
replaces:
  - "/docs/proposals/20181231-replaced-proposal.md"
superseded-by:

>   - "/docs/proposals/20190104-superceding-proposal.md"

Author: Passed through, if you have any other proposal suggestions to link here feel free to share them, I just added a reference to the prototype pattern on wikipedia and removed replaces/superseded by since they don't really fit here

- [Title](#title)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Glossary](#glossary)
  - [Summary](#summary)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals/Future Work](#non-goalsfuture-work)
  - [Proposal](#proposal)
    - [User Stories](#user-stories)
      - [Story 1](#story-1)
      - [Story 2](#story-2)
    - [Requirements (Optional)](#requirements-optional)
      - [Functional Requirements](#functional-requirements)
        - [FR1](#fr1)
        - [FR2](#fr2)
      - [Non-Functional Requirements](#non-functional-requirements)
        - [NFR1](#nfr1)
        - [NFR2](#nfr2)
    - [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
    - [Security Model](#security-model)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
    - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
    - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

> Node Prototype Pattern - Where we take a known good/working OS snapshot and make a “prototype” upon which all future node OS’ images are based. Citation: Skyman VMSS "Prototype Pattern" - Speech Wiki

Author: I didn't realize it wasn't a publicly available link, fixed

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### As an operator of CAPZ, I want faster horizontal scaling on new node deployment

People setting up CAPZ clusters will be able to have faster horizontal scaling because their Nodes’s OS images will be continually cached, and thus they will be able to avoid longer pull times and avoid having to create warm nodes and overprovision.

#### As an operator, I want to be able to be more inline with security compliance as I spin up nodes

As an operator I would like to be able to have my node’s OS image cache for the ability to avoid security alerts, cache security updates and patches so that I’ll be more security compliant and up to date when I have to spin up a new node. Otherwise, flags will be raised that a node is out of date on boot up before it finishes patching and a temporary security risk will exist.

#### As an operator, I want to be able to have pods run quicker when scheduled

As a cluster operator I want to bring up new nodes that already have the container images of the applications it will run pre-cached so that pods start running quicker when scheduled.

> #### Credits

Author: Moved under motivation

A big thank you to Jack Francis, Michael Sinz, and Amr Hanafi for their work on the Kamino project that used a similar Prototype Pattern with AKSEngine which inspired this feature request: jackfrancis/kamino: Kubernetes node clone factory (github.com)

### Requirements (Optional)

#### Functional Requirements

None currently known to be needed

##### FR1

##### FR2

#### Non-Functional Requirements

##### NFR1
The solution should increase the performance of horizontal scaling over time as people use this feature

##### NFR2
The solution should cause no increased risks with security or reliability

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

The plan is to create a Controller which implements the feature with the Node Prototype Pattern as desired.

> These controller additions can be added to azuremachine_controller.go because that is where AzureMachines are being controlled and azuremachinepool_controller.go since that is where the AzureMachinePools are being controlled.

Author: It should behave the same way to my knowledge, if it does work much differently we can remove from the scope of this proposal but for now I would prefer to keep it because I believe they work extremely similarly/it would be preferrable to have this feature for both

> An operator will be able to decide to turn the feature on or off with a flag on creation of a cluster, and then can alter the YAML file for AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool to customize how long they want the caching interval to be.

Author: Ended up switching the proposal from a flag to an environment variable since that seems like it will be easier to integrate without CAPI changes, added an example. Configuration of the caching interval is noted to be in the YAMLs for the AzureMachineTemplates and AzureMachinePools.

Every time that amount of time has passed, it should go through the nodes of the cluster, choose a healthy node, shut it down, take a snapshot of it, restart it, create a shared image gallery image, delete the snapshot, and then configure the AzureMachineTemplate specs to use that shared image gallery image.

> 	As for why the healthy node has to be shut down while creating a snapshot of it, if it isn’t shut down first then pods can be scheduled as the snapshot is taken which will cause some dangerous states in terms of how it exists after being utilized by the AzureMachineTemplates.

Author: Saw it also in some other places so I changed it in the ones I saw as well as this one

> In terms of how a healthy node would be selected, there should be an annotation on each node as to when they’ve last been patched. An ideal node would be one which has been patched since the last prototype went into service and is running and healthy. Whichever node has been steadily healthy for the longest amount of time should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. As the prototype is always from a successfully healthy and working node the image is always known to be working before being chosen for replication.

Author: I think it's under status on each node, changed (might be worth making even more specific though)

> In terms of how a healthy node would be selected, there should be an annotation on each node as to when they’ve last been patched. An ideal node would be one which has been patched since the last prototype went into service and is running and healthy. Whichever node has been steadily healthy for the longest amount of time should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. As the prototype is always from a successfully healthy and working node the image is always known to be working before being chosen for replication.

Author: Made this more clear in that we simply want to know how long it's been since the last patch(s) for nodes who have that patch(s), a reset to the clock should naively reset how long it has been stable since differentiating between why it reset is out of scope/much nastier to do and not necessary for a naïve implementation (assuming I understood this comment correctly)

In terms of data model changes, AzureMachine and AzureMachinePool changes are likely and the changes we expect will be purely additive and nonbreaking. No removals should be required to the data model. For AzureMachine on AzureMachineTemplate we will add a new optional field under spec.template.spec called nodeCachingMode which will be enabled if present and a sub field under that called cacheInterval which will be set to 1 day by default, and it will be a required subfield of nodeCachingMode if that field is there. For AzureMachinePool we will do the same thing under spec.template in the AzureMachinePool files.

Example AzureMachineTemplate yaml:
``` AzureMachineTemplate
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachineTemplate
metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine-template
  namespace: default
spec:
  template:
    spec:

>       nodeCachingMode:

Author: Made sense, moved to Stable and switched the example spec in this location

>         interval: 1 day

Author: Changed to 24h

```

Example AzureMachinePool yaml:
``` AzureMachinePool
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachinePool
metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine-pool
  namespace: default
spec:
  template:
    nodeCachingMode:
      interval: 1 day
```

> A model scenario would be an operator spinning up a CAPZ cluster and having this feature be able to be toggled on or off. If it was toggled on, then as the months passed and more security updates and patches needed to be applied to the operator’s node OS image, these changes would be cached on a regular interval and the operator would no longer have to wait for these changes to apply on new node creations. This would help prevent warm nodes and overprovisioning as well as allowing the operator to have faster horizontal scaling.

Author: Integrated

![Figure 1](./images/node-os-image-cache.png)

### Security Model

> This proposal requires CAPZ to have write permissions for azureMachineTemplates in order to properly update the nodes’ OS image on the spec. Regex expressions will potentially be used for when a user declares a time amount for the interval that they want to specify, and denial of service attacks will be protected against by having an update system which doesn’t need to be atomic, if part of the caching is complete there is no risk in the update not finishing since the spec update will happen at once. No sensitive data is being stored in a secret. 

Author: Moved to not using them/using time.ParseDuration as suggested above in comments on this PR instead.

### Risks and Mitigations

Example risks:

> 1. A bad snapshot is taken, and we will mitigate this risk by having a rollback if a bad snapshot is detected as taken and have prevention techniques in place to detect if the snapshot is bad before taking it.

Author: Added more details, for this proposal I'm just outlining the easiest method. A much better method would be to try to make a new node before caching for detection or some other way to prevent failure altogether, but those methods are more complex and are slower if failures are rare so the rollback is better explained instead currently since it's more in scope.

1. A bad security patch or update might have been applied to a user’s node that they don’t want to be applied to future nodes. To mitigate this risk, we will make it easy for users to turn this feature off, and if they fix it on their original node the snapshot will be taken of that node instead.

The UX will mostly be impactful towards operators and members of the CAPZ community will test these changes and give feedback on them. Security will also likely follow in terms of how it gets reviewed, but no major security problems should be possible from this change. For folks who work outside the SIG or subproject, they should hopefully have faster horizontal scaling without needing to directly do anything outside of maybe a feature flag just as a collateral effect.

## Alternatives

No currently known alternatives exist which are public and have been implemented for CAPZ. A savvy operator may also have created a similar system for their nodes but we hope to offload that responsibility to the CAPZ team in this process, and currently no other open source implementations of this for CAPZ are known to exist. 

> 	In terms of when to take a snapshot, a day is given as a general example which should be good for typical use but the specification of how often will be customizable as we know that certain operators have different strategies and use cases for how they’re running their services on our clusters. 

Author: Fixed in a previous cleaning commit

> 	In terms of when to take a snapshot, a day is given as a general example which should be good for typical use but the specification of how often will be customizable as we know that certain operators have different strategies and use cases for how they’re running their services on our clusters. 

Author: Moved only the snapshot part as I believe that that part makes the most sense to move but I think the other parts make sense in alternatives, if you disagree just put another comment and I'll make the change

In terms of how we choose a node as the blessed one, lots of different metrics or heuristics can be used like manually creating a temporary prototype for testing, having the fastest ready time, or anything else which is seen as typically good but a more generalist approach is outlined here since more specific methods may not be as helpful for certain operators. 
For architectural details of where else the code could exist, the controller section makes the most sense since this proposal will be constantly modifying the state of our objects, but theoretically it could be largely put into hack with shell scripts and then a controller could simply be ordered to trigger that shell script, but this is less maintainable in the long run and not as preferred. 

## Upgrade Strategy

> Turning off or on the feature is all that is required to keep previous behavior or make use of the enhancement. No backwards compatibility will be broken, all this feature request will do is add a new controller which can be utilized or not as desired.

Author: It's on a cluster/operator basis, make it clearer in the docs

> Turning off or on the feature is all that is required to keep previous behavior or make use of the enhancement. No backwards compatibility will be broken, all this feature request will do is add a new controller which can be utilized or not as desired.

Author: Fixed this in the commit that deals with the 'feature' ambiguity, now references previous controllers to be modified

## Additional Details

### Test Plan [optional]

There will be e2e tests, at least one of which will be as follows:
 Have an example node and an example patch, apply the patch to the preexisting node, and then trigger the controller to pretend the interval of time has passed, and then it should attempt to create another node and compare the OS image of the new node and the original node, finding that they are both the same image.
It should be tested primarily in isolation as other components shouldn’t affect what it tries to do, but it may need to be checked with other components to see what happens if certain race conditions or updates at the same time of AzureMachineTemplate are occurring (in which case a lower priority should likely be assigned to this controller for finishing it’s task after as ideally those changes are in effect before isolating the node)

### Graduation Criteria [optional]

alpha - The feature is initially constructed and toggleable with a flag
beta - The feature has e2e tests implemented and is more integrated and seamless with the project

> stable - The feature has been used for a while and is widely acceptable as well as reliable and will now be enabled by default.

Reviewer 2: I think we should nail down some firmer criteria for each of these so we have more concrete goals to work towards.

Author: Since this is mentioned in a later comment, I'm going to close this down for now to reduce redundancy.

        - [NFR1](#nfr1)
        - [NFR2](#nfr2)
    - [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
    - [Security Model](#security-model)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
    - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
    - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

Node Prototype Pattern - Where we take a known good/working OS snapshot and make a “prototype” upon which all future node OS’ images are based.

Warm nodes - The concept of keeping up extraneous and unused nodes to prevent having to wait for patches or security updates, thus allowing you to have those nodes ready when more users try to use your service without the wait times.

Shared Image Gallery - A repository that is an Azure Resource for managing and sharing images

Snapshot - A static copy of the image at the point in time that it is taken

> Blessed Node - Whichever node has been the most stable and is chosen off of that metric as the one to clone the OS image of and cache it for future nodes to use

Reviewer 3: Nit: "Prototype Node" sounds a bit more scientific 

how do we determine which node "has been the most stable"?

> Blessed Node - Whichever node has been the most stable and is chosen off of that metric as the one to clone the OS image of and cache it for future nodes to use

Author: Replaced most stable with steadily healthy the longest and defined that, also replaced blessed node with prototype node

## Summary

A controller will be added to CAPZ which caches the Nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and updates the model to use that image for future scale outs. This feature will allow for:
- faster horizontal scaling 
- prevent security alerts from new nodes which immediately need a security update as those new nodes will now come with the security update already installed
- help prevent users from needing to spin up warm nodes and overprovision

## Motivation

> A model scenario would be an operator spinning up a CAPZ cluster and having this feature be able to be toggled on or off with an environment variable. If it was toggled on, then as the months passed and more security updates and patches needed to be applied to the operator’s node OS image, these changes would be cached on a regular interval and the operator would no longer have to wait for these changes to apply on new node creations. As a result, users will have faster horizontal scaling and require fewer warm nodes and overprovisioning to avoid this problem, especially since the new nodes will have the container images of the applications it will run pre-cached so pods will run quicker when scheduled. This feature will also help users have better security compliance as new nodes will already be compliant instead of needing to patch.

Author: Removed mention of it in motivation

#### Credits

A big thank you to Jack Francis, Michael Sinz, and Amr Hanafi for their work on the Kamino project that used a similar Prototype Pattern with AKSEngine which inspired this feature request: https://github.com/jackfrancis/kamino

### Goals

> 1. A solution using the Node Prototype pattern which cache’s nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and replaces it as a new ‘golden image’.

Author: Done

1. Faster horizontal scale outs
1. Prevent security breaking issues on node bootup from security updates being required immediately

We will know we’ve succeeded when we can benchmark speed increases and successful image changes

### Non-Goals/Future Work

1. Extend the functionality to Windows nodes
1. Optimization for efficiency and scalability

> 1. A more complicated method of selecting a good candidate node such as incorporating manual forced prototype creation, which would perform better but take research to find the optimal method. 

Reviewer 3: nit: some bullet points have "." at the end and others don't, let's change to one or the other to be consistent

Author: Consistently no "." at the end for the Goals/Non-Goals/Future work section

1. Optimization of the default time interval into a specific, best general default which would have to be researched

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### As an operator of CAPZ, I want faster horizontal scaling on new node deployment

> People setting up CAPZ clusters will be able to have faster horizontal scaling because their Nodes’s OS images will be continually cached, and thus they will be able to avoid longer pull times and avoid having to create warm nodes and overprovision.

Reviewer 3: user stories should be in first person

Reviewer 3: I think this user story sounds like it's more about reducing cost (both $$ and environmental) and improve sustainability because it will allow operators to not keep extra "warm nodes" around. The speed of scaling itself doesn't change (it actually gets a bit slower if you don't have the VM pre-provisioned) but what gets faster is going from VM to node running my application (starting pods), that's story 3.

#### As an operator, I want to be able to be more inline with security compliance as I spin up nodes

As an operator I would like to be able to have my node’s OS image cache for the ability to avoid security alerts, cache security updates and patches so that I’ll be more security compliant and up to date when I have to spin up a new node. Otherwise, flags will be raised that a node is out of date on boot up before it finishes patching and a temporary security risk will exist.

#### As an operator, I want to be able to have pods run quicker when scheduled

As a cluster operator I want to bring up new nodes that already have the container images of the applications it will run pre-cached so that pods start running quicker when scheduled.

### Requirements (Optional)

#### Functional Requirements

None currently known to be needed

##### FR1

##### FR2

#### Non-Functional Requirements

##### NFR1

##### NFR2

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> The plan is to modify the existing Controllers with the Node Prototype Pattern as desired. These controller additions can be added to AzureMachine Controller and AzureMachinePool Controller.

Reviewer 3: In the summary above you mention "A controller will be added" which contradicts this sentence of modifying existing controllers. Which one is it?

Author: Modifying existing as of right now, I just forgot to change it here, thanks!

> An operator will be able to decide to turn the feature on or off with an environment variable on creation of a cluster, and then can update the AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool to customize how long they want the caching interval to be (see the yaml files below in this section for the caching interval).

Reviewer 3: is the idea behind using an environment variable to turn this on via a feature flag for the whole CAPZ pod? Have we considered making it a more granular per cluster configuration so the feature can be enabled on a per-cluster basis?

Author: Made this much more understandable in the document - The environment variable will allow it to be usable for the whole CAPZ pod and then per cluster it will be default enabled or disabled (based on if we're in alpha, beta or graduated) and can be added or removed per cluster as desired by altering AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool instances.

Author: Since this absolutely should be a feature which is enable-able on a per-cluster basis

As for why the healthy node has to be shut down while creating a snapshot of it, if it isn’t shut down first then pods can be scheduled as the snapshot is taken which will cause some dangerous states in terms of how it exists after being utilized by the AzureMachineTemplates.

In terms of how a healthy node would be selected, there is already an annotation on each node from its status as to when they’ve last been patched. An ideal node would be one which has been patched since the last prototype went into service and is running and healthy. Whichever node has been steadily healthy for the longest amount of time should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. As the prototype is always from a successfully healthy and working node the image is always known to be working before being chosen for replication.

In terms of when to take a snapshot, a day is given as a general example which should be good for typical use but the specification of how often will be customizable as we know that certain operators have different strategies and use cases for how they’re running their services on our clusters.

> In terms of data model changes, AzureMachine and AzureMachinePool changes are likely and the changes we expect will be purely additive and nonbreaking. No removals should be required to the data model. For AzureMachine on AzureMachineTemplate we will add a new optional field under spec.template.spec called nodeCachingMode which will be enabled if present and a sub field under that called cacheInterval which will be set to 1 day by default, and it will be a required subfield of nodeCachingMode if that field is there. For AzureMachinePool we will do the same thing under spec.template in the AzureMachinePool files.

Reviewer 3: One thing this proposal hasn't explored yet is how to make the changes in a non-disruptive way for existing machines. The current default behavior for MachineDeployments and MachinePools is to trigger a rolling update if the template changes. This means all Machines will be automatically replaced so they always match the desired state. We don't want this every time the image is updated because it would be quite disruptive (imagine all your nodes having to be shutdown and rebuilt every day or however frequent the interval is). How can we avoid this?

Reviewer 2: +1, I wonder if something like a new or existing `spec.strategy` from MachineDeployment might be valuable here: https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/cluster.x-k8s.io/MachineDeployment/v1beta1@v1.3.8#spec-strategy

Author: Mentioned how we can add an optional field to rollingUpdate and set it to false by default to prevent this automatic rollout

Example AzureMachineTemplate yaml:
```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachineTemplate
metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine-template
  namespace: default
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      nodeCachingMode:
        interval: 24h
```

Example AzureMachinePool yaml:
```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachinePool
metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine-pool
  namespace: default
spec:
  template:
    nodeCachingMode:
      interval: 24h
```

![Figure 1](./images/node-os-image-cache.png)

### Security Model
This proposal requires CAPZ to have write permissions for azureMachineTemplates in order to properly update the nodes’ OS image on the spec. Go has a library called time and time.ParseDuration will be used to parse the time interval provided by an operator instead of using regular expressions. Denial of service attacks will be protected against by having an update system which doesn’t need to be atomic. If part of the caching is complete there is no risk in the update not finishing since the spec update will happen at once. No sensitive data is being stored in a secret.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 3: should we also mention the maintenance cost and $ cost of maintaining an image gallery? What about scaling and performance? Would be good to refer to documented Shared Image Gallery limits.

    - [Security Model](#security-model)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
    - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
    - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

Node Prototype Pattern - Where we take a known good/working OS snapshot and make a “prototype” upon which all future node OS’ images are based.

Warm nodes - The concept of keeping up extraneous and unused nodes to prevent having to wait for patches or security updates, thus allowing you to have those nodes ready when more users try to use your service without the wait times.

Azure Compute Gallery - An Azure Resource for managing and sharing artifacts such as images

Snapshot - A static copy of the image at the point in time that it is taken

Prototype Node - Whichever node is chosen to clone the OS image of and cache it for future nodes to use

## Summary

> The operator can toggle this feature on or off to cache the Nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and update the model to use that image for future scale outs.

Author: Rephrased this summary, taking inspiration from the example provided here

  - [Glossary](#glossary)
  - [Summary](#summary)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals/Future Work](#non-goalsfuture-work)
  - [Proposal](#proposal)
    - [User Stories](#user-stories)
    - [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
    - [Security Model](#security-model)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
    - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
    - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

Node Prototype Pattern - Where we take a known good/working OS snapshot and make a “prototype” upon which all future node OS’ images are based.

Warm nodes - The concept of keeping up extraneous and unused nodes to prevent having to wait for patches or security updates, thus allowing you to have those nodes ready when more users try to use your service without the wait times.

> Compute Image Gallery - A repository that is an Azure Resource for managing and sharing images

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Azure Compute Gallery - An Azure Resource for managing and sharing artifacts such as images
```

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/azure-compute-gallery

Snapshot - A static copy of the image at the point in time that it is taken

Prototype Node - Whichever node is chosen to clone the OS image of and cache it for future nodes to use

## Summary

The existing controllers will be modified to cache the Nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and update the model to use that image for future scale outs. This feature will:

> - allow for faster horizontal scaling 

Reviewer 3: these bullet points are closer to motivation (they explain the "why"). Summary section should be a short 1-2 sentence summary of the feature proposed, or a "tldr" for the doc.

> The existing controllers will be modified

this is an implementation detail

Author: Fixed, thank you!

- prevent security alerts from new nodes which immediately need a security update as those new nodes will now come with the security update already installed
- help prevent users from needing to spin up warm nodes and overprovision

## Motivation

> A model scenario would be an operator spinning up a CAPZ cluster and having this feature be able to be toggled on or off. If it was toggled on, then as the months passed and more security updates and patches needed to be applied to the operator’s node OS image, these changes would be cached on a regular interval and the operator would no longer have to wait for these changes to apply on new node creations. Operators will also have the option of immediately propagating updates to nodes according to a RollingUpdate configuration or rely on the dynamic nature of the cluster to scale in updated nodes as needed by toggling a configuration. As a result, users will have faster horizontal scaling and require fewer warm nodes and overprovisioning to avoid this problem, especially since the new nodes will have the container images of the applications it will run pre-cached so pods will run quicker when scheduled. This feature will also help users have better security compliance as new nodes will already be compliant instead of needing to patch.

Reviewer 3: this motivation section should describe the _why_ more than the _how_

Why does this proposal matter? What problems is it solving? keep it short and concise

Author: Fixed, made it much briefer and stopped discussing things similar to a user story here

### Goals

> 1. A solution using the Node Prototype pattern which cache’s nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and replaces it as a new MachinePool template VM image

Reviewer 3: this is the summary of the overall proposal 

goals might include: to make the feature opt-in (or configurable), to not break existing users, etc.

Think of what's "in scope" vs "out of scope" for this proposal

Author: Added those goals and reworded some of the others to make them sound more like what we generally want as end goals.

#### As an operator, I want to be able to be more inline with security compliance as I spin up nodes

As an operator I would like to be able to have my node’s OS image cache for the ability to avoid security alerts, cache security updates and patches so that I’ll be more security compliant and up to date when I have to spin up a new node. Otherwise, flags will be raised that a node is out of date on boot up before it finishes patching and a temporary security risk will exist.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

The plan is to modify the existing Controllers with the Node Prototype Pattern as desired. These controller additions can be added to AzureMachinePool Controller.

An operator will be able to decide to turn the feature on or off with an environment variable on clusterctl initialization, and then on a cluster by cluster basis can alter the AzureMachinePools to specify the use of the feature. They can also update the AzureMachinePool to customize how long they want the caching interval to be (see the yaml files below in this section for the caching interval).

Example of the environment variable being turned on:

```

> export AZURE_OS_CACHING=true

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
export AZURE_NODE_OS_CACHING=true
```

this is arguably less ambiguous (although longer)

Author: Sounds good to me

```

The controller will maintain a timestamp in each AzureMachinePool, and when the current time is the chosen interval ahead or more, the controller will perform the caching. Since the current controller manager requeues all objects every ten minutes by default the objects will be requeued shortly after its due time to be recached. This is because typically we expect to cache every 24 hours and it is very unexpected that this won't be frequent enough considering normal patch rates. 

Example of how the timestamp will be maintained in the AzureMachinePool:

```yaml
status:

>   lastPrototype: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  lastImagePrototype: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"
```

consider being more explicit here, "prototype" could apply to many things

```

When the process is started it should go through the nodes of the cluster, choose a healthy node, shut it down, take a snapshot of it, restart it, create a compute image gallery image, delete the snapshot, and then configure the AzureMachinePool specs to use that compute image gallery image. After, it will store the current time as its timestamp. As a note, for the first implementation of this feature we will require the user to also use a compute image gallery image.

Diagram of the Node OS Caching Process:

![Figure 1](./images/node-os-image-cache.png)

> As for why the healthy node has to be shut down while creating a snapshot of it, if it isn’t shut down first then pods can be scheduled as the snapshot is taken which will cause some dangerous states in terms of how it exists after being utilized by the AzureMachinePools.

Reviewer 3: All object names such as "AzureMachinePools" or variable references should ideally be formatted as code, i.e. `AzureMachinePools` , `metadata.creationTimestamp`, `latestModelApplied` , `true`

Author: This took a minute to format, but done!

> In terms of how a healthy node would be selected, there is already state data present on each AzureMachinePoolMachine which we can use and is listed in the examples below. An ideal node would be one which is running and healthy. Whichever node has been running and healthy for the longest amount of time should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. This means that for AzureMachinePoolMachines we will take the node with the earliest creation time from metadata.creationTimestamp and has latestModelApplied : true present if it is an AzureMachinePoolMachine since this means that any user changes to the OS image have been rolled out already on this node. As the prototype is always from a successfully healthy and working node the image is always known to be working before being chosen for replication. In terms of knowing if the node os image has had updates that are not user made (so like automatic kernel patches), for the first development of this feature we won't know but all nodes in a cluster are configured to regularly automatically apply security patches to system packages.

Reviewer 3: consider breaking down the "Implementation Details" section into subsections to replace the "In terms of" transitions. This could be a "Node Selection" subsection.

Author: Done!

1. A bad security patch or update might have been applied to a user’s node that they don’t want to be applied to future nodes. To mitigate this risk, we will make it easy for users to turn this feature off, and if they fix it on their original node the snapshot will be taken of that node instead.
1. Deleting previous snapshots might not allow for new image instantiations from those snapshots since Compute Gallery Image Definition Version instances may depend directly on those snapshots still being there. Instead deletion can be done after making sure the new image is successful for new deployments. Another way to mitigate this is to implement the deletion with the optional field for rolling update and if the prototyping is non-rolling slowly make all the images of the previously instantiated azuremachinepoolmachines match the current image, and when the previous image isn't being used anymore delete that version and the snapshot associated with it. 

> The following limits exist for Azure Compute Galleries:

Reviewer 3: these might evolve and become outdated quickly so it might be better to directly link to the Azure docs for source of truth and not copy them in this document

Author: Fixed

1. 100 galleries, per subscription, per region
1. 1,000 image definitions, per subscription, per region
1. 10,000 image versions, per subscription, per region
1. 100 replicas per image version however 50 replicas should be sufficient for most use cases
1. Any disk attached to the image must be less than or equal to 1 TB in size
1. Resource move isn't supported for Azure compute gallery resources

Link to page with Azure Compute Gallery limits: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/azure-compute-gallery

> Thus the feature will not work for OS images with disks attached greater than 1 TB in size. These limits should be kept in mind by the operator since this feature requires the use of an Azure Compute Gallery. The Azure Compute Gallery itself costs no money. For each image, it costs roughly $0.10 - $0.13 for a CAPI image per region and $0.10 - $0.30 for a plain Flatcar image per region with the Standard HDD LRS storage account type every day. Scaling across other regions will also accrue network egress charges. Thus, the feature may cost the operator more money if they don't need faster horizontal scaling.

Reviewer 3: same with costs. We don't want this doc to be used as source of truth for future Azure users. Everything should point to Azure docs and not state any numbers for costs.

Author: No docs were directly found for these costs, instead I had an email from someone who provided them so I'm just going to remove these and omit any direct pricing mentioning outside of a link to the snapshot pricing

---
title: Integrate Node OS Image caching with CAPZ
authors:
  - "@bennycortese"
reviewers:
  - "@nojnhuh"
  - "@CecileRobertMichon"
  - "@jackfrancis"
  - "@willie-yao"
creation-date: 2023-06-12
last-updated: 2023-06-12

status: provisional
see-also:
  - "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prototype_pattern"
---

# Title 
Integrate Node OS Image caching with CAPZ

## Table of Contents

> - [Title](#title)

Author: I think it is up to date now, as far as I can tell

Example of how the timestamp will be maintained in the AzureMachinePool:

```yaml
status:
  lastPrototype: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"
```

When the process is started it should go through the nodes of the cluster, choose a healthy node, shut it down, take a snapshot of it, restart it, create a compute image gallery image, delete the snapshot, and then configure the AzureMachinePool specs to use that compute image gallery image. After, it will store the current time as its timestamp. As a note, for the first implementation of this feature we will require the user to also use a compute image gallery image.

Diagram of the Node OS Caching Process:

![Figure 1](./images/node-os-image-cache.png)

As for why the healthy node has to be shut down while creating a snapshot of it, if it isn’t shut down first then pods can be scheduled as the snapshot is taken which will cause some dangerous states in terms of how it exists after being utilized by the AzureMachinePools.

> In terms of how a healthy node would be selected, there is already state data present on each AzureMachinePoolMachine which we can use and is listed in the examples below. An ideal node would be one which is running and healthy. Whichever node has been running and healthy for the longest amount of time should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. This means that for AzureMachinePoolMachines we will take the node with the earliest creation time from metadata.creationTimestamp and has latestModelApplied : true present if it is an AzureMachinePoolMachine since this means that any user changes to the OS image have been rolled out already on this node. If it is an AzureMachine, since they tend to be updated together with automatic security updates and are immutable in regard to user changes to the OS image, we don't need to worry about a field like latestModelApplied. As the prototype is always from a successfully healthy and working node the image is always known to be working before being chosen for replication. In terms of knowing if the node os image has had updates that are not user made (so like automatic kernel patches), for the first development of this feature we won't know but all nodes should roughly be updated together so it will be fine in most cases.

Author: Specified this much better/similar to what you suggested here

metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine-pool-machine
  namespace: default
  creationTimestamp: "2023-06-20T17:41:54Z"
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-20T17:43:39Z"
    status: "True"
    type: Ready
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-20T17:43:39Z"
    status: "True"
    type: BootstrapSucceeded
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-20T17:43:39Z"
    status: "True"
    type: NodeHealthy
  latestModelApplied: true
  ready: true
```

In terms of when to take a snapshot, a day is given as a general example which should be good for typical use but the specification of how often will be customizable as we know that certain operators have different strategies and use cases for how they’re running their services on our clusters.

In terms of data model changes, AzureMachinePool will be changed and the changes we expect will be purely additive and nonbreaking. No removals should be required to the data model. For AzureMachinePool we will add a new optional field under spec.template.image called nodePrototyping which will be enabled if present and it have a required field under it called interval which will map to an interval of 1 day or 24 hours by default.

> For AzureMachinePool, we will also add an optional field under spec.strategy.rollingUpdate called prototypeAutomaticRollout which will be set to false by default since we don't want the replacement of a node OS image to automatically trigger a rolling update of all the nodes. This is because the new image will be functionally identical to the old one outside of name itself (since the old nodes will all have the update and security patch contents already present). If for some reason the operator wants to always trigger this rollout (maybe if they programmatically use the image names themselves), then they can simply set this field to true.

Author: I am still relatively confident that we can't do it with the existing rollingUpdate parameters because of the fact that normal rollingUpdate still needs to work as the user intended, so we can't really hyjack any of those fields

> For AzureMachinePool, we will also add an optional field under spec.strategy.rollingUpdate called prototypeAutomaticRollout which will be set to false by default since we don't want the replacement of a node OS image to automatically trigger a rolling update of all the nodes. This is because the new image will be functionally identical to the old one outside of name itself (since the old nodes will all have the update and security patch contents already present). If for some reason the operator wants to always trigger this rollout (maybe if they programmatically use the image names themselves), then they can simply set this field to true.

Author: @CecileRobertMichon @mboersma Do either of you have a good idea for where to put this field? Optionally under rolling update is awkward and it can't be its own strategy because it needs to be usable with someone using rollingupdate for other general things

> For AzureMachinePool, we will also add an optional field under spec.strategy.rollingUpdate called prototypeAutomaticRollout which will be set to false by default since we don't want the replacement of a node OS image to automatically trigger a rolling update of all the nodes. This is because the new image will be functionally identical to the old one outside of name itself (since the old nodes will all have the update and security patch contents already present). If for some reason the operator wants to always trigger this rollout (maybe if they programmatically use the image names themselves), then they can simply set this field to true.

Reviewer 3: As discussed offline, this doesn't need to be in scope for the initial proposal. I agree with @nojnhuh we should try to reuse what's there already as having a second "rollingUpdate" field in the API makes the API ambiguous and redundant.

See also https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/tasks/upgrading-clusters.html?highlight=rolloutA#how-to-schedule-a-machine-rollout

> For AzureMachinePool, we will also add an optional field under spec.strategy.rollingUpdate called prototypeAutomaticRollout which will be set to false by default since we don't want the replacement of a node OS image to automatically trigger a rolling update of all the nodes. This is because the new image will be functionally identical to the old one outside of name itself (since the old nodes will all have the update and security patch contents already present). If for some reason the operator wants to always trigger this rollout (maybe if they programmatically use the image names themselves), then they can simply set this field to true.

Author: Ended up removing this out of the proposal entirely because I think at this point it's both out of scope/any other uses the operator has can be covered by scheduling an after rollout.

### Risks and Mitigations

Example risks:
1. A bad snapshot is taken, and we will mitigate this risk by having trying to prevent it before it happens by checking if things are ready and draining everything before taking the snapshot. Rolling back and determining if a bad snapshot is bad is out of scope for this proposal currently and will be for the operator to watch, so here we will simply try to prevent it as best as we can.
1. A bad security patch or update might have been applied to a user’s node that they don’t want to be applied to future nodes. To mitigate this risk, we will make it easy for users to turn this feature off, and if they fix it on their original node the snapshot will be taken of that node instead.

> 1. Deleting previous snapshots might break things since Compute Gallery Image Definition Version instances may depend directly on those snapshots still being there. A way to mitigate this is to implement the deletion with the optional field for rolling update and if the prototyping is non-rolling slowly make all the images of the previously instantiated azuremachinepoolmachines match the current image, and when the previous image isn't being used anymore delete that version and the snapshot associated with it.

Author: I thought about it and realized that the image construction would be running and thus not dependent on them anymore, so I reworded this section a bit to make it make more sense/removed the might break things ambiguity.

The following limits exist for Azure Compute Galleries:
1. 100 galleries, per subscription, per region
1. 1,000 image definitions, per subscription, per region
1. 10,000 image versions, per subscription, per region
1. 100 replicas per image version however 50 replicas should be sufficient for most use cases
1. Any disk attached to the image must be less than or equal to 1 TB in size
1. Resource move isn't supported for Azure compute gallery resources

Link to page with Azure Compute Gallery limits: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/azure-compute-gallery

> Thus the feature will not work for OS images with disks attached greater than 1 TB in size. These limits should be kept in mind by the operator since this feature requires the use of an Azure Compute Gallery. The Azure Compute Gallery itself costs no money. For each image, it costs roughly $0.10 - $0.13 for a CAPI image per region and $0.1 - $0.3 for a plain Flatcar image per region with the Standard HDD LRS storage account type every day. Scaling across other regions will also accrue network egress charges. Thus, the feature may cost the operator more money if they don't need faster horizontal scaling.

Reviewer 2: Do `$0.1` and `$0.3` mean 10 cents and 30 cents, or is this a typo and it should be `$0.01` and `$0.03`? Either way, two digits for cents seems clearest.

Author: It was because of how an email was sent to me about these prices with this formatting, fixed!

## Alternatives

No currently known alternatives exist which are public and have been implemented for CAPZ. A savvy operator may also have created a similar system for their nodes but we hope to offload that responsibility to the CAPZ team in this process, and currently no other open source implementations of this for CAPZ are known to exist. 

In terms of how we choose a node as the prototype node, lots of different metrics or heuristics can be used like manually creating a temporary prototype for testing, having the fastest ready time, or anything else which is seen as typically good but a more generalist approach is outlined here since more specific methods may not be as helpful for certain operators.

> For architectural details of where else the code could exist, the controller section makes the most sense since this proposal will be constantly modifying the state of our objects, but theoretically it could be largely put into hack with shell scripts and then a controller could simply be ordered to trigger that shell script, but this is less maintainable in the long run and not as preferred. 

Reviewer 2: One other related aspect I'm not sure is discussed in the doc is putting this code in the AzureMachinePool controller vs. creating a new controller.

Author: Added a sentence here about this tradeoff/discussion

### Graduation Criteria [optional]

Experimental:

The feature is initially constructed and toggleable with an environment variable. It will be implemented as described in this document and have e2e tests implemented and integrated in the project.

Stable: 

The feature has been used for a while and is widely acceptable as well as reliable and will now be enabled by default.

At this point a more sophisticated method of choosing a healthy node will be used, preferably by annotating the AzureMachinePoolMachine instances after every patch. This will allow for more optimization and fewer unnecessary uses of this operation as if no updates in the interval are needed we would be able to now properly know.

### Version Skew Strategy [optional]

The feature itself should not depend significantly on the version of CAPI and will be backwards compatible with old versions of CAPZ since it will be a toggleable feature. If there is a drift in CAPI and CAPZ versions, the functionality should stay the same without breaking anything.

> ## Implementation History

Reviewer 2: Reminder to fill this section out.

Author: Filled it out

Warm nodes - The concept of keeping up extraneous and unused nodes to prevent having to wait for patches or security updates, thus allowing you to have those nodes ready when more users try to use your service without the wait times.

Shared Image Gallery - A repository that is an Azure Resource for managing and sharing images

Snapshot - A static copy of the image at the point in time that it is taken

Prototype Node - Whichever node has been the most steadily healthy for the longest (so it has the oldest last transition to ready state) and is chosen off of that metric as the one to clone the OS image of and cache it for future nodes to use

## Summary

The existing controllers will be modified to cache the Nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and update the model to use that image for future scale outs. This feature will allow for:
- faster horizontal scaling 
- prevent security alerts from new nodes which immediately need a security update as those new nodes will now come with the security update already installed
- help prevent users from needing to spin up warm nodes and overprovision

## Motivation

> A model scenario would be an operator spinning up a CAPZ cluster and having this feature be able to be toggled on or off. If it was toggled on, then as the months passed and more security updates and patches needed to be applied to the operator’s node OS image, these changes would be cached on a regular interval and the operator would no longer have to wait for these changes to apply on new node creations. As a result, users will have faster horizontal scaling and require fewer warm nodes and overprovisioning to avoid this problem, especially since the new nodes will have the container images of the applications it will run pre-cached so pods will run quicker when scheduled. This feature will also help users have better security compliance as new nodes will already be compliant instead of needing to patch.

Author: Done, might be able to reword it to make explicit mention of the default but I think my change is fine as is (if it should mention default ideal just tell me)

Example of the enviornment variable being turned on:

```
export AZURE_OS_CACHING=true
```

The controller will maintain a timestamp in each AzureMachinePool and AzureMachineTemplate, and when the current time is the chosen interval ahead or more, the controller will perform the caching. Since the current controller manager requeues all objects every ten minutes by default the objects will be requeued shortly after its due time to be recached. This is because typically we expect to cache every 24 hours and it is very unexpected that this won't be frequent enough considering normal patch rates. When the process is started it should go through the nodes of the cluster, choose a healthy node, shut it down, take a snapshot of it, restart it, create a shared image gallery image, delete the snapshot, and then configure the AzureMachineTemplate specs to use that shared image gallery image. After, it will store the current time as its timestamp.

Example of how the timestamp will be maintained in the AzureMachinePool and AzureMachineTemplates:

```yaml
status:
  conditions:

>   - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"

Reviewer 3: as we discussed offline, `lastTransitionTime` is only updated if there is a change in the condition `status` https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/main/util/conditions/setter.go#L39. In general, conditions are meant to be user-facing and informational about the operational state of the cluster, not used to communicate timestamps to controllers. You can read more about conditions here: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/main/docs/proposals/20200506-conditions.md#constraints

Author: Moved to a non-condition in the status to represent this timestamping.

There will be e2e tests, at least one of which will be as follows:
Have an example node and an example patch, apply the patch to the preexisting node, and then trigger the controller to pretend the interval of time has passed, and then it should attempt to create another node and compare the OS image of the new node and the original node, finding that they are both the same image.

It should be tested primarily in isolation as other components shouldn’t affect what it tries to do, but it may need to be checked with other components to see what happens if certain race conditions or updates at the same time of AzureMachineTemplate are occurring (in which case a lower priority should likely be assigned to this controller for finishing its task after as ideally those changes are in effect before isolating the node).

### Graduation Criteria [optional]

Alpha:

The feature is initially constructed and toggleable with an environment variable

Beta:

The feature has e2e tests implemented and is more integrated and seamless with the project.

Stable: 

The feature has been used for a while and is widely acceptable as well as reliable and will now be enabled by default.

> For AzureMachineTemplate we will move the feature enabled specification from metadata.annotations to a new optional field under spec.template.spec called nodeCachingMode which will be enabled if present and a sub field under that called cacheInterval which will be set to 1 day by default, and it will be a required subfield of nodeCachingMode if that field is there. For AzureMachinePool we will do the same thing under spec.template in the AzureMachinePool files.

Reviewer 3: Have we considered defining the feature in the API from the start instead of using annotations but putting it behind a feature flag such that a validation error is returned if the field is set but the feature flag isn't enabled? E.g. https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/blob/main/exp/api/v1beta1/azuremachinepool_webhook.go#L76

Author: I changed it to follow this style

Example AzureMachineTemplate yaml:
```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachineTemplate
metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine-template
  namespace: default
spec:
  template:
    spec:

>       nodeCachingMode:

Reviewer 3: It would make sense to put this configuration with the `Image` spec since the image details will no longer be relevant if the prototype mode is used https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/blob/main/api/v1beta1/types.go#L402

Author: Makes sense to me, done/moved

Warm nodes - The concept of keeping up extraneous and unused nodes to prevent having to wait for patches or security updates, thus allowing you to have those nodes ready when more users try to use your service without the wait times.

Compute Image Gallery - A repository that is an Azure Resource for managing and sharing images

Snapshot - A static copy of the image at the point in time that it is taken

Prototype Node - Whichever node has been the most steadily healthy for the longest (so it has the oldest last transition to ready state) and is chosen off of that metric as the one to clone the OS image of and cache it for future nodes to use

## Summary

The existing controllers will be modified to cache the Nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and update the model to use that image for future scale outs. This feature will allow for:
- faster horizontal scaling 
- prevent security alerts from new nodes which immediately need a security update as those new nodes will now come with the security update already installed
- help prevent users from needing to spin up warm nodes and overprovision

## Motivation

> A model scenario would be an operator spinning up a CAPZ cluster and having this feature be able to be toggled on or off. If it was toggled on, then as the months passed and more security updates and patches needed to be applied to the operator’s node OS image, these changes would be cached on a regular interval and the operator would no longer have to wait for these changes to apply on new node creations. Operators will also have the option of immediately propogating updates to nodes according to a RollingUpdate configuration or rely on the dynamic nature of the cluster to scale in updated nodes as needed by toggling a configuration. As a result, users will have faster horizontal scaling and require fewer warm nodes and overprovisioning to avoid this problem, especially since the new nodes will have the container images of the applications it will run pre-cached so pods will run quicker when scheduled. This feature will also help users have better security compliance as new nodes will already be compliant instead of needing to patch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A model scenario would be an operator spinning up a CAPZ cluster and having this feature be able to be toggled on or off. If it was toggled on, then as the months passed and more security updates and patches needed to be applied to the operator’s node OS image, these changes would be cached on a regular interval and the operator would no longer have to wait for these changes to apply on new node creations. Operators will also have the option of immediately propagating updates to nodes according to a RollingUpdate configuration or rely on the dynamic nature of the cluster to scale in updated nodes as needed by toggling a configuration. As a result, users will have faster horizontal scaling and require fewer warm nodes and overprovisioning to avoid this problem, especially since the new nodes will have the container images of the applications it will run pre-cached so pods will run quicker when scheduled. This feature will also help users have better security compliance as new nodes will already be compliant instead of needing to patch.
```

#### As an operator of clusters managed by CAPZ, I want to reduce monetary and environmental costs

As a cluster operator I want to have lower monetary and environmental costs. I want my Nodes' OS images to be continually cached, and thus I will be able to avoid longer pull times and avoid having to create warm nodes and overprovision. This will be better for the environment and cheaper for me as I will not have to waste excess resources on warm nodes.

#### As an operator, I want to be able to be more inline with security compliance as I spin up nodes

As an operator I would like to be able to have my node’s OS image cache for the ability to avoid security alerts, cache security updates and patches so that I’ll be more security compliant and up to date when I have to spin up a new node. Otherwise, flags will be raised that a node is out of date on boot up before it finishes patching and a temporary security risk will exist.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

The plan is to modify the existing Controllers with the Node Prototype Pattern as desired. These controller additions can be added to AzureMachine Controller and AzureMachinePool Controller.

> An operator will be able to decide to turn the feature on or off with an environment variable on clusterctl initialization, and then on a cluster by cluster basis can alter the AzureMachineTemplates and AzureMachinePools to specify the use of the feature. They can also update the AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool to customize how long they want the caching interval to be (see the yaml files below in this section for the caching interval).

Reviewer 2: Have we considered scoping this proposal to only AzureMachinePools and let AzureMachineTemplates be future work? I think we have better control over the semantics there (e.g. rollouts) where it seems like CAPI changes would be necessary to make this pattern usable for MachineDeployments.

(I could've sworn I made a comment like this yesterday, so I'm sorry if this is a dupe)

Reviewer 2: cc @jackfrancis 
Do you have an opinion on perhaps reducing scope here?

Reviewer 3: +1 for reducing scope for initial implementation, however we should consider both in the design proposal so the design is shared and reusable as much as possible

> Example of the enviornment variable being turned on:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example of the environment variable being turned on:
```

Example of how the timestamp will be maintained in the AzureMachinePool and AzureMachineTemplates:

```yaml
status:
  lastPrototype: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"
```

When the process is started it should go through the nodes of the cluster, choose a healthy node, shut it down, take a snapshot of it, restart it, create a compute image gallery image, delete the snapshot, and then configure the AzureMachineTemplate specs to use that compute image gallery image. After, it will store the current time as its timestamp. As a note, for the first implementation of this feature we will require the user to also use a compute image gallery image.

Diagram of the Node OS Caching Process:

![Figure 1](./images/node-os-image-cache.png)

As for why the healthy node has to be shut down while creating a snapshot of it, if it isn’t shut down first then pods can be scheduled as the snapshot is taken which will cause some dangerous states in terms of how it exists after being utilized by the AzureMachineTemplates.

> In terms of how a healthy node would be selected, there is already state data present on each AzureMachinePoolMachine and AzureMachine which we can use and is listed in the examples below. An ideal node would be one which is running and healthy. Whichever node has been running and healthy for the longest amount of time should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. This means that for AzureMachinePoolMachines and AzureMachines we will take the node with the earliest creation time from metadata.creationTimestamp and has latestModelApplied : true present if it is an AzureMachinePoolMachine since this means that any user changes to the OS image have been rolled out already on this node. If it is an AzureMachine, since they tend to be updated together with automatic security updates and are immutable in regard to user changes to the OS image, we don't need to worry about a field like latestModelApplied. As the prototype is always from a successfully healthy and working node the image is always known to be working before being chosen for replication. In terms of knowing if the node os image has had updates that are not user made (so like automatic kernal patches), for the first development of this feature we won't know but all nodes should roughly be updated together so it will be fine in most cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In terms of how a healthy node would be selected, there is already state data present on each AzureMachinePoolMachine and AzureMachine which we can use and is listed in the examples below. An ideal node would be one which is running and healthy. Whichever node has been running and healthy for the longest amount of time should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. This means that for AzureMachinePoolMachines and AzureMachines we will take the node with the earliest creation time from metadata.creationTimestamp and has latestModelApplied : true present if it is an AzureMachinePoolMachine since this means that any user changes to the OS image have been rolled out already on this node. If it is an AzureMachine, since they tend to be updated together with automatic security updates and are immutable in regard to user changes to the OS image, we don't need to worry about a field like latestModelApplied. As the prototype is always from a successfully healthy and working node the image is always known to be working before being chosen for replication. In terms of knowing if the node os image has had updates that are not user made (so like automatic kernel patches), for the first development of this feature we won't know but all nodes should roughly be updated together so it will be fine in most cases.
```

    type: DisksReady
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-20T17:40:16Z"
    status: "True"
    type: VMRunning
  ready: true
```

In terms of when to take a snapshot, a day is given as a general example which should be good for typical use but the specification of how often will be customizable as we know that certain operators have different strategies and use cases for how they’re running their services on our clusters.

In terms of data model changes, AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool will be changed and the changes we expect will be purely additive and nonbreaking. No removals should be required to the data model. For AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool we will add a new optional field under spec.template.image called nodePrototyping which will be enabled if present and it have a required field under it called interval which will map to an interval of 1 day or 24 hours by default.

Example AzureMachineTemplate yaml:
```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachineTemplate
metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine-template
  namespace: default
spec:
  template:
    image:
      nodePrototyping:
        interval: 24h
```

> For AzureMachinePool, we will also add an optional field under spec.strategy.rollingUpdate called prototypeAutomaticRollout which will be set to false by default since we don't want the replacement of a node OS image to automatically trigger a rolling update of all the nodes. This is because the new image will be functionally identical to the old one outside of name itself (since the old nodes will all have the update and security patch contents already present). If for some reason the operator wants to always trigger this rollout (maybe if they programatically use the image names themselves), then they can simply set this field to true.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For AzureMachinePool, we will also add an optional field under spec.strategy.rollingUpdate called prototypeAutomaticRollout which will be set to false by default since we don't want the replacement of a node OS image to automatically trigger a rolling update of all the nodes. This is because the new image will be functionally identical to the old one outside of name itself (since the old nodes will all have the update and security patch contents already present). If for some reason the operator wants to always trigger this rollout (maybe if they programmatically use the image names themselves), then they can simply set this field to true.
```

Example AzureMachinePool yaml:
```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachinePool
metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine-pool
  namespace: default
spec:
  image:
      nodePrototyping:
        interval: 24h
  rollingUpdate:
      deletePolicy: Oldest
      maxSurge: 25%
      maxUnavailable: 1
      prototypeAutomaticRollout: false
  type: RollingUpdate
```

### Security Model

This proposal requires CAPZ to have write permissions for azureMachinePools and azureMachineTemplates in order to properly update the nodes’ OS image on the spec. Go has a library called time and time.ParseDuration will be used to parse the time interval provided by an operator instead of using regular expressions. Denial of service attacks will be protected against by having an update system which doesn’t need to be atomic. If part of the caching is complete there is no risk in the update not finishing since the spec update will happen at once. No sensitive data is being stored in a secret.

### Risks and Mitigations

Example risks:

> 1. A bad snapshot is taken, and we will mitigate this risk by having trying to prevent it before it happens by checking if things are ready and draining everything before taking the snapshot. Rolling back and determining if a bad shapshot is bad is out of scope for this proposal currently and will be for the operator to watch, so here we will simply try to prevent it as best as we can.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. A bad snapshot is taken, and we will mitigate this risk by having trying to prevent it before it happens by checking if things are ready and draining everything before taking the snapshot. Rolling back and determining if a bad snapshot is bad is out of scope for this proposal currently and will be for the operator to watch, so here we will simply try to prevent it as best as we can.
```

## Glossary

Node Prototype Pattern - Where we take a known good/working OS snapshot and make a “prototype” upon which all future node OS’ images are based.

Warm nodes - The concept of keeping up extraneous and unused nodes to prevent having to wait for patches or security updates, thus allowing you to have those nodes ready when more users try to use your service without the wait times.

Shared Image Gallery - A repository that is an Azure Resource for managing and sharing images

Snapshot - A static copy of the image at the point in time that it is taken

Prototype Node - Whichever node has been the most steadily healthy for the longest (so it has the oldest last transition to ready state) and is chosen off of that metric as the one to clone the OS image of and cache it for future nodes to use

## Summary

> The existing controllers will modified to cache the Nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and update the model to use that image for future scale outs. This feature will allow for:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The existing controllers will be modified to cache the Nodes’ OS image on a regular interval and update the model to use that image for future scale outs. This feature will allow for:
```

1. Faster horizontal scale outs of applications
1. Prevent security breaking issues on node bootup from security updates being required immediately

We will know we’ve succeeded when we can benchmark speed increases and successful image changes.

### Non-Goals/Future Work

1. Extend the functionality to Windows nodes
1. Optimization for efficiency and scalability
1. A more complicated method of selecting a good candidate node such as incorporating manual forced prototype creation, which would perform better but take research to find the optimal method
1. Optimization of the default time interval into a specific, best general default which would have to be researched

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### As an operator, I want to be able to have faster horizontal scaling with pods running quicker when scheduled

As a cluster operator I want to bring up new nodes that already have the container images of the applications it will run pre-cached so that pods start running quicker when scheduled, resulting in faster horizontal scaling.

> #### As an operator of CAPZ, I want to reduce monetary and environmental costs

Reviewer 2: I think these personas are distinct, so this might be more applicable?
```suggestion
#### As an operator of clusters managed by CAPZ, I want to reduce monetary and environmental costs
```

As a cluster operator I want to have lower monetary and environmental costs. I want my Nodes' OS images to be continually cached, and thus I will be able to avoid longer pull times and avoid having to create warm nodes and overprovision. This will be better for the environment and cheaper for me as I will not have to waste excess resources on warm nodes.

#### As an operator, I want to be able to be more inline with security compliance as I spin up nodes

As an operator I would like to be able to have my node’s OS image cache for the ability to avoid security alerts, cache security updates and patches so that I’ll be more security compliant and up to date when I have to spin up a new node. Otherwise, flags will be raised that a node is out of date on boot up before it finishes patching and a temporary security risk will exist.

### Requirements (Optional)

#### Functional Requirements

> None currently known to be needed.

Reviewer 2: Leaving as a reminder that once we're fairly confident we won't specify any requirements it's probably worth omitting this section entirely.

Author: Ended up just omitting the section because so far it doesn't seem that we'll need it (we can always add it back worst case but I'm fairly confident at this point we won't need to)

1. Optimization for efficiency and scalability
1. A more complicated method of selecting a good candidate node such as incorporating manual forced prototype creation, which would perform better but take research to find the optimal method
1. Optimization of the default time interval into a specific, best general default which would have to be researched

> 1. Bad snapshot rollbacks since it will be hard to generically determine when a snapshot is bad currently

Reviewer 2: It may still be worth trying to come up with a manual rollback method, but I think it's the "automatic bad snapshot detection" piece that we should definitely call out of scope:
```suggestion
1. Automatic bad snapshot rollbacks since it will be hard to generically determine when a snapshot is bad currently
```

Example of how the timestamp will be maintained in the AzureMachinePool and AzureMachineTemplates:

```yaml
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"
    status: "True"
    type: LastOsCache
```

As for why the healthy node has to be shut down while creating a snapshot of it, if it isn’t shut down first then pods can be scheduled as the snapshot is taken which will cause some dangerous states in terms of how it exists after being utilized by the AzureMachineTemplates.

> In terms of how a healthy node would be selected, there is already a timestamp on each AzureMachinePool from its status.conditions.lastTransitionTime type ScaleSetModelUpdated as to when they’ve last been patched. There is also a timestamp on its status.conditions.lastTransitionTime type ScaleSetRunning as to when it last started running. For AzureMachine instances, we would need to add these timestamps or track it programmatically, below I have put an example of the yaml changes for storing the timestamp. An ideal node would be one which has been patched since the last prototype went into service and is running and healthy. Whichever node has been running and healthy for the longest amount of time since the last patch and has the patch applied should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. As the prototype is always from a successfully healthy and working node the image is always known to be working before being chosen for replication.

Reviewer 2: > there is already a timestamp on each AzureMachinePool from its status.conditions.lastTransitionTime type ScaleSetModelUpdated as to when they’ve last been patched.

I don't think that's what that condition indicates. I think `ScaleSetModelUpdated` only means "the actual state of the underlying VMSS matches the desired state in the AzureMachinePool." This is also a condition on the whole AzureMachinePool, whereas we'd need to see when each individual VMSS VM instance was updated.

Author: Fixed this whole area, met with both of you Friday and got this all in a much better/more solid state by looking at the azuremachinepoolmachines themselves and finding this 'updated' data on each of them.

> In terms of how a healthy node would be selected, there is already a timestamp on each AzureMachinePool from its status.conditions.lastTransitionTime type ScaleSetModelUpdated as to when they’ve last been patched. There is also a timestamp on its status.conditions.lastTransitionTime type ScaleSetRunning as to when it last started running. For AzureMachine instances, we would need to add these timestamps or track it programmatically, below I have put an example of the yaml changes for storing the timestamp. An ideal node would be one which has been patched since the last prototype went into service and is running and healthy. Whichever node has been running and healthy for the longest amount of time since the last patch and has the patch applied should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. As the prototype is always from a successfully healthy and working node the image is always known to be working before being chosen for replication.

Reviewer 2: > There is also a timestamp on its status.conditions.lastTransitionTime type ScaleSetRunning as to when it last started running.

This is another condition on the entire AzureMachinePool where we would need how long each individual VM has been running, since not all VMs are expected to start running at the same time.

Author: Fixed this whole area, met with you and Jack Friday and got this all in a much better/more solid state by looking at the azuremachinepoolmachines themselves and finding this 'updated' data on each of them.

    status: "True"
    type: Ready
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-12T23:14:00Z"
    status: "True"
    type: BootstrapSucceeded
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"
    status: "True"
    type: ScaleSetDesiredReplicas
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"
    status: "True"
    type: ScaleSetModelUpdated
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"
    status: "True"
    type: ScaleSetRunning
```

Example AzureMachine yaml with the proposed additional needed timestamps in status:

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachine
metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine
  namespace: default
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"
    status: "True"
    type: ScaleSetModelUpdated
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"
    status: "True"
    type: ScaleSetRunning
```

In terms of when to take a snapshot, a day is given as a general example which should be good for typical use but the specification of how often will be customizable as we know that certain operators have different strategies and use cases for how they’re running their services on our clusters.

> In terms of data model changes, AzureMachine and AzureMachinePool changes are likely and the changes we expect will be purely additive and nonbreaking. No removals should be required to the data model. For AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool we will add a new optional field under meta.annotations called nodeCachingModeInterval which will be enabled if present and it will map to an interval of 1 day by default.

Reviewer 2: > In terms of data model changes, AzureMachine and AzureMachinePool changes are likely and the changes we expect will be purely additive and nonbreaking.

I think the little bit of conjecture here was ok for the initial issue before drafting the proposal, but I think you have enough here now that this can be a bit more assertive.

Example of how the timestamp will be maintained in the `AzureMachinePool`:

```yaml
status:
  lastImagePrototype: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"
```

When the process is started it should go through the nodes of the cluster, choose a healthy node, shut it down, take a snapshot of it, restart it, create a Azure Compute Gallery image, delete the snapshot, and then configure the `AzureMachinePool` spec to use that Azure Compute Gallery image. After, it will store the current time as its timestamp. As a note, for the first implementation of this feature we will require the user to also use a Azure Compute Gallery image.

Diagram of the Node OS Caching Process:

![Figure 1](./images/node-os-image-cache.png)

As for why the healthy node has to be shut down while creating a snapshot of it, if it isn’t shut down first then pods can be scheduled as the snapshot is taken which will cause some dangerous states in terms of how it exists after being utilized by the `AzureMachinePools`.

> Healthy Node Selection:

Reviewer 2: Formatting the headings like this might be a bit more readable.
```suggestion
#### Healthy Node Selection
```

Author: I agree/had been thinking about this, fixed!

#### Non-Functional Requirements

##### NFR1

##### NFR2

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

The plan is to modify the existing Controllers with the Node Prototype Pattern as desired. These controller additions can be added to AzureMachine Controller and AzureMachinePool Controller.

An operator will be able to decide to turn the feature on or off with an environment variable on creation of a cluster, and then can update the AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool to customize how long they want the caching interval to be (see the yaml files below in this section for the caching interval).

Example of the enviornment variable being turned on:

```
export AZURE_OS_CACHING=true
```

> The controller will maintain a timestamp, and when the current time is the chosen interval ahead or more, the controller will perform the caching. When the process is started it should go through the nodes of the cluster, choose a healthy node, shut it down, take a snapshot of it, restart it, create a shared image gallery image, delete the snapshot, and then configure the AzureMachineTemplate specs to use that shared image gallery image. After, it will store the current time as its timestamp.

Reviewer 2: > The controller will maintain a timestamp

Where exactly might the timestamp be kept?

And might it be worth building in some additional assurance that the AzureMachinePool/AzureMachineTemplate object gets requeued shortly after its due time to be re-cached? The controller manager currently requeues all objects every 10 minutes by default, so it might be good enough to rely on that if the expected interval for caching is on the order of 24 hours.

Author: Proposed putting the timestamp on the resources themselves and 10 minutes is plenty frequent so I noted that.

As for why the healthy node has to be shut down while creating a snapshot of it, if it isn’t shut down first then pods can be scheduled as the snapshot is taken which will cause some dangerous states in terms of how it exists after being utilized by the AzureMachineTemplates.

> In terms of how a healthy node would be selected, there is already an annotation on each node from its status as to when they’ve last been patched. An ideal node would be one which has been patched since the last prototype went into service and is running and healthy. Whichever node has been steadily healthy for the longest amount of time since the last patch and has the patch applied should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. As the prototype is always from a successfully healthy and working node the image is always known to be working before being chosen for replication.

Reviewer 2: > there is already an annotation on each node from its status as to when they’ve last been patched

When I read "annotation" in this context that generally refers to the object's `metadata.annotations` but "status" usually means the `status` field on the object. Do you mean one of those in particular? And could you provide an example here?

Author: I specified and gave example YAMLs (sadly this isn't a default on AzureMachine instances so it might be out of scope for this proposal, I proposed adding these timestamps to it or we can store it programmatically and it is already present on AzureMachinePool instances)

Example of how the timestamp will be maintained in the AzureMachinePool and AzureMachineTemplates:

```yaml
status:
  lastPrototype: "2023-06-12T23:14:55Z"
```

When the process is started it should go through the nodes of the cluster, choose a healthy node, shut it down, take a snapshot of it, restart it, create a compute image gallery image, delete the snapshot, and then configure the AzureMachineTemplate specs to use that compute image gallery image. After, it will store the current time as its timestamp. As a note, for the first implementation of this feature we will require the user to also use a compute image gallery image.

Diagram of the Node OS Caching Process:

![Figure 1](./images/node-os-image-cache.png)

As for why the healthy node has to be shut down while creating a snapshot of it, if it isn’t shut down first then pods can be scheduled as the snapshot is taken which will cause some dangerous states in terms of how it exists after being utilized by the AzureMachineTemplates.

> In terms of how a healthy node would be selected, there is already state data present on each AzureMachinePoolMachine and AzureMachine which we can use and is listed in the examples below. An ideal node would be one which is running and healthy. Whichever node has been running and healthy for the longest amount of time since the last patch and has the patch applied should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. This means that for AzureMachinePoolMachines and AzureMachines we will take the node with the earliest creation time from metadata.creationTimestamp and has latestModelApplied : true present if it is an AzureMachinePoolMachine. As the prototype is always from a successfully healthy and working node the image is always known to be working before being chosen for replication. In terms of knowing if the patch has been applied, for the first development of this feature we won't know but all nodes should roughly be patched together so it will be fine in most cases.

Reviewer 2: > Whichever node has been running and healthy for the longest amount of time since the last patch and has the patch applied should be chosen as it’s the most overall stable. This means that for AzureMachinePoolMachines and AzureMachines we will take the node with the earliest creation time from metadata.creationTimestamp and has latestModelApplied : true present if it is an AzureMachinePoolMachine.

I'm not sure this paragraph makes clear the difference between "patches" and `latestModelApplied` (or if there is any difference). To me it reads like we might be using one? or the other? or both?

And it's not also clear to me based on the doc exactly what "patches" are in this context.

Author: Tried to clarify latestModelApplied definition here and remove use of "patches" in an ambiguous sense and only use it where explicit (so automatic kernel patches).

Example AzureMachinePoolMachine yaml with the important fields shown (want status.ready == true, latestModelApplied: true and each status: "True"):

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachinePool
metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine-pool-machine
  namespace: default
  creationTimestamp: "2023-06-20T17:41:54Z"
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-20T17:43:39Z"
    status: "True"
    type: Ready
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-20T17:43:39Z"
    status: "True"
    type: BootstrapSucceeded
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-20T17:43:39Z"
    status: "True"
    type: NodeHealthy
  latestModelApplied: true
  ready: true
```

> Example AzureMachine yaml with the important fields shown (want status.ready == true and each status: "True"):

Reviewer 2: If an AzureMachine doesn't have something like `status.latestModelApplied`, then how do we know we're selecting a node running the most up-to-date image? Otherwise it seems like there's a risk that a node running an older image is selected for replication and future nodes are based on that older image.

Author: Added a line explaining this here: 'If it is an AzureMachine, since they tend to be updated together with automatic security updates and are immutable in regard to user changes to the OS image, we don't need to worry about a field like latestModelApplied.' I hope that kind of makes sense, basically latestModelApplied lets us know when the user has altered the image manually and it is still updating to that image, but AzureMachines don't behave like that in general, so we don't need to account for this 1:1 (at least as far as I currently understand it), we should just need typical ready conditions and creation timestamps.

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachine
metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine
  namespace: default
  creationTimestamp: "2023-06-20T17:38:39Z"
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-20T17:41:16Z"
    status: "True"
    type: Ready
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-20T17:41:16Z"
    status: "True"
    type: BootstrapSucceeded
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-20T17:40:16Z"
    status: "True"
    type: DisksReady
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-06-20T17:40:16Z"
    status: "True"
    type: VMRunning
  ready: true
```

In terms of when to take a snapshot, a day is given as a general example which should be good for typical use but the specification of how often will be customizable as we know that certain operators have different strategies and use cases for how they’re running their services on our clusters.

> In terms of data model changes, AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool will be changed and the changes we expect will be purely additive and nonbreaking. No removals should be required to the data model. For AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool we will add a new optional field under spec.template.image called nodePrototyping which will be enabled if present and it have a required field under it called interval which will map to an interval of 1 day or 24 hours by default. For AzureMachinePool, we will also add an optional field under spec.strategy.rollingUpdate called prototypeAutomaticRollout which will be set to false by default since we don't want the replacement of a node OS image to automatically trigger a rolling update of all the nodes. This is because the new image will be functionally identical to the old one outside of name itself (since the old nodes will all have the update and security patch contents already present). If for some reason the operator wants to always trigger this rollout (maybe if they programatically use the image names themselves), then they can simply set this field to true.

Reviewer 2: The description of data model changes might be easier to follow if they were arranged like:
```
<Prose describing the changes for AzureMachineTemplate>

<AzureMachineTemplate YAML>

<Prose describing the changes for AzureMachinePool>

<AzureMachinePool YAML>
```

vs. 

```
<Prose describing the changes for AzureMachineTemplate>
<Prose describing the changes for AzureMachinePool>

<AzureMachineTemplate YAML>

<AzureMachinePool YAML>
```

Author: Reformatted for the most part, separated out AzureMachinePool specific stuff

> In terms of data model changes, AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool will be changed and the changes we expect will be purely additive and nonbreaking. No removals should be required to the data model. For AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool we will add a new optional field under spec.template.image called nodePrototyping which will be enabled if present and it have a required field under it called interval which will map to an interval of 1 day or 24 hours by default. For AzureMachinePool, we will also add an optional field under spec.strategy.rollingUpdate called prototypeAutomaticRollout which will be set to false by default since we don't want the replacement of a node OS image to automatically trigger a rolling update of all the nodes. This is because the new image will be functionally identical to the old one outside of name itself (since the old nodes will all have the update and security patch contents already present). If for some reason the operator wants to always trigger this rollout (maybe if they programatically use the image names themselves), then they can simply set this field to true.

Reviewer 2: > For AzureMachinePool, we will also add an optional field under spec.strategy.rollingUpdate called prototypeAutomaticRollout which will be set to false by default since we don't want the replacement of a node OS image to automatically trigger a rolling update of all the nodes.

How will this behavior be achieved for AzureMachineTemplates?

Author: There isn't a great/clean way to do this, which is why we've moved AzureMachineTemplates out of scope

#### Non-Functional Requirements

##### NFR1

##### NFR2

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

The plan is to modify the existing Controllers with the Node Prototype Pattern as desired. These controller additions can be added to AzureMachine Controller and AzureMachinePool Controller.

> An operator will be able to decide to turn the feature on or off with an environment variable on creation of a cluster, and then can update the AzureMachineTemplate and AzureMachinePool to customize how long they want the caching interval to be (see the yaml files below in this section for the caching interval).

Reviewer 2: > with an environment variable on creation of a cluster

Similar features in CAPZ have been put behind feature flags like the ones defined here: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/blob/af8668a62483d7484792b4767bc4089f1f96d584/feature/feature.go#L56-L63

Then those are enabled on the capz-controller-manager Pod in the Deployment spec defined here: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/blob/af8668a62483d7484792b4767bc4089f1f96d584/config/manager/manager.yaml#L26

So generally, users would enable features in CAPZ like this:
```
export MY_FAVORITE_FEATURE=true
clusterctl init -i azure
```

That makes the feature available for all clusters managed by that CAPZ instance. To make this more granular on a per-cluster or per-machine pool basis, I wonder if we could use the presence or absence of node caching-specific configuration (like the time interval) to ultimately determine whether or not the node caching will be invoked.

Author: Yup and the sync about this was very helpful, thank you so much!

  ready: true
```

When to take a Snapshot:

A day is given as a general example which should be good for typical use but the specification of how often will be customizable as we know that certain operators have different strategies and use cases for how they’re running their services on our clusters.

Data model changes:

> `AzureMachinePool` will be changed and the changes we expect will be purely additive and nonbreaking. No removals should be required to the data model. For `AzureMachinePool` we will add a new optional field under `spec.template.image` called `nodePrototyping` which will be enabled if present and it have a required field under it called interval which will map to an interval of 1 day or 24 hours by default.

Reviewer 2: > `AzureMachinePool` will be changed and the changes we expect will be purely additive and nonbreaking.

I think we're far enough along that we can make this a bit more assertive:
```suggestion
`AzureMachinePool` will be changed and the proposed changes are purely additive and nonbreaking. No removals should be required to the data model. For `AzureMachinePool` we will add a new optional field under `spec.template.image` called `nodePrototyping` which will be enabled if present and it have a required field under it called interval which will map to an interval of 1 day or 24 hours by default.
```

spec:
  template:
    nodeCachingMode:
      interval: 24h
```

![Figure 1](./images/node-os-image-cache.png)

### Security Model
This proposal requires CAPZ to have write permissions for azureMachineTemplates in order to properly update the nodes’ OS image on the spec. Go has a library called time and time.ParseDuration will be used to parse the time interval provided by an operator instead of using regular expressions. Denial of service attacks will be protected against by having an update system which doesn’t need to be atomic. If part of the caching is complete there is no risk in the update not finishing since the spec update will happen at once. No sensitive data is being stored in a secret.

### Risks and Mitigations

Example risks:

> 1. A bad snapshot is taken, and we will mitigate this risk by having a rollback if a bad snapshot is detected as taken and have prevention techniques in place to detect if the snapshot is bad before taking it. In practice, when a new node is spun up with the bad snapshot, it will be detected and then the node will be shut down. The node OS image being used to create new nodes will then be reverted to the previous one which will still be cached until a successful new node has been spawned, so since it was a failed creation here we will just revert to that previous image and create the desired node.

Reviewer 2: > when a new node is spun up with the bad snapshot, it will be detected

Detecting which nodes are "bad" might be a bit gnarly for CAPZ to do generically. Maybe we can call this out of scope and put this responsibility on the user? So a user might ensure a small scale out with a new image is successful (by their own metrics) before scaling further out. Or perhaps this might be integrated with MachineHealthChecks (which I think might also be a bit too ambitious for now)?

Author: Moved it to out of scope and noted that we will simply try to avoid it as best as we currently can and the rest is on the operator

metadata:
  name: node-os-image-caching-machine-template
  namespace: default
  annotations:

>     nodeCachingInterval: 24h

Reviewer 2: Annotation keys tend to be formatted a bit differently than field names under `spec` (https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/), e.g. https://github.com/nojnhuh/cluster-api-provider-azure/blob/2bc1b22e429ee160533a4379a6b2f87cc698b622/azure/const.go

Author: Ended up moving this around to the point where I think this isn't as relevant currently.

1. A bad snapshot is taken, and we will mitigate this risk by having trying to prevent it before it happens by checking if things are ready and draining everything before taking the snapshot. Rolling back and determining if a bad shapshot is bad is out of scope for this proposal currently and will be for the operator to watch, so here we will simply try to prevent it as best as we can.
1. A bad security patch or update might have been applied to a user’s node that they don’t want to be applied to future nodes. To mitigate this risk, we will make it easy for users to turn this feature off, and if they fix it on their original node the snapshot will be taken of that node instead.

> The following limits exist for Azure Compute Galleries:

Reviewer 2: Is there a link to Azure docs that describes these limits? I think that would be worth including in the doc if so.

Author: Linked

### Graduation Criteria [optional]

Alpha:

The feature is initially constructed and toggleable with an environment variable

Beta:

> The feature has e2e tests implemented and is more integrated and seamless with the project.

Reviewer 2: @CecileRobertMichon Is there any precedent for distinguishing alpha vs. beta features in CAPZ?

Author: Switched to this Experimental vs Stable format

Stable: 

The feature has been used for a while and is widely acceptable as well as reliable and will now be enabled by default.

> For AzureMachineTemplate we will move the feature enabled specification from metadata.annotations to a new optional field under spec.template.spec called nodeCachingMode which will be enabled if present and a sub field under that called cacheInterval which will be set to 1 day by default, and it will be a required subfield of nodeCachingMode if that field is there. For AzureMachinePool we will do the same thing under spec.template in the AzureMachinePool files.

Reviewer 2: It may be worth noting that CAPZ should still interpret the annotation for some TBD number of releases to allow users time to transition to the `spec` field.

Author: Ended up just moving it altogether and putting it behind a feature flag

### Graduation Criteria [optional]

Experimental:

The feature is initially constructed and toggleable with an environment variable. It will be implemented as described in this document and have e2e tests implemented and integrated in the project.

Stable: 

The feature has been used for a while and is widely acceptable as well as reliable and will now be enabled by default.

> At this point a more sophisticated method of choosing a healthy node will be used, preferrably by annotating the AzureMachine and AzureMachinePoolMachine instances after every patch. This will allow for more optimization and fewer unnecessary uses of this operation as if no updates in the interval are needed we would be able to now properly know.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point a more sophisticated method of choosing a healthy node will be used, preferably by annotating the AzureMachine and AzureMachinePoolMachine instances after every patch. This will allow for more optimization and fewer unnecessary uses of this operation as if no updates in the interval are needed we would be able to now properly know.
```
